# hist300_week12

## Module 3 Consolidation

## Data Literacy

This third module of the course was mostly focused on the communication of digital data, rather than collecting or analyzing it. So it was only fitting that the first week dealt a lot with data communication and miscommunication. Catherine D'Ignazio and Lauren Klein's chapter in Data Feminism (The Numbers Don’t Speak for Themselves) highlights a very real issue with what I'll call data literacy. The author of the FiveThirtyEight article misread the data about the kidnappings in Nigeria, and as a result, came to an entirely incorrect conclusion. I noticed, in the week 9 activity where we drew information from the Archaeology Data Service, how these simple mistakes can be rather easy to make. For example, the Whithorn site boasted the largest yield of cone beakers from any of the other sites. Digging a little further, it also seemed to have the most bowls of any site (though albeit by a lesser margin). If I had just stopped at the first stage, I could have said something such as "Cone beakers were more popular at Whithorn than any other site" and believed the data backed me up, when in reality, Whithorn seemed to just have an overall larger number of recorded artifacts. This is just a small example of how data can easily be misread to come to an incorrect conclusion.

Here, I think the concept of reproducibility becomes important. Not only in the ways that it allows the actual conclusions one makes to be reproduced, and re-verified (Such as how Hope Loiselle reconstructed Ben Marwick's analysis), but also in the way that reproduction helps with 'data literacy' and understanding / teaching. As Marwick argues, reproduction is a great way of teaching what I've been calling data literacy, a way in which one becomes more capable of reading the data in front of them. Certainly, for me at least, following Loiselle's process helped me understand Marwick's research, conclusion, and process much better than simply reading his article. 

## Reproduction

Ben Marwick popped up quite a bit throughout this last module, in readings and assignments, and I did find a lot of his points on digital reproduction very prevalent. Specifically, his article written with Carl Boettiger and Lincoln Mullen, "Packaging Data Analytical Work ReproduciblyUsing R (and Friends)", gave me a lot to think about on the process of reproduction in digital archaeology. Specifically, when it came to week 10 and we faced the failure of the research compendium assignment (As discussed in the discord), I took some time to think about reproducibility and research compendiums. It helped me identify what I consider to be my biggest failure in the class, and that is my lack of any sort of research compendium. Besides this project, I realized the our github repositories could also serve as a compendium of sorts, in how we recorded our work over the course of the semester. I stopped keeping a lot of records of my work as the semester went on, as I more-or-less rushed through certain assignments and forgot to save other ones. Additionally, as Marwick states in that article, a lot of academics are reluctant to expose their workflow because of similar reasons I was reluctant to keep a compendium of sorts - It was messy, chaotic, apparently indecipherable in a lot of cases, and frankly a bit embarrassing. This isn't a failure I can necessarily improve on for this class (I think it's a bit late for that) but it's certainly a lesson in responsibility and maturity. There was discussion in the hypothes.is on that article about the ethical dimensions of open science and open data - what should be openly accessible and what the privacy concerns of open data would mean. While this may be the opposite direction from that discussion, I think my failure to keep an accurate compendium of my work has been an irreversible "closing" of data, cutting off the potential of reproduction, and creating the potential for a whole load of issues. At the very least, I can hope to say a failure here means I won't make a similar mistake when there is the possibility of real consequences.

## Collaboration and Accountability

In light of that recent revelation, I had some interesting perspectives on the crowd-funded archaeology assignments in week 10. Firstly, that this class activity was the latest in a series of activities over the course of the semester that has reinforced the ideals of collective learning and cooperative work in archaeology in general, which has been an amazing focus when so much of a student's academic experience is focused on the personal rather than the group. With that, also, I realized the collaboration is inviting criticism and accountability. You can't just ignore the opinions and perspectives of others, especially in archaeology - that's a recipe for hurt (Thinking specifically of the Tonto National Monument 'consultation' from 'Why the Whiteness of Archaeology Is a Problem'). Additionally, this type of collaboration allows for an expanded skillset, beyond what just one archaeologist is capable of. I'll spare too much talk about collaboration here - I've mentioned it in my previous consolidations, and I plan to mention it in my wrap-up / end ticket at the end of this one.

## Course Wrap-Up

I'll start off this wrap-up by saying the same things I think a lot of people are saying. This course is not what I expected, and I was very nervous to start. I really did not know what I was signing up for, and I should probably have read the course description more closely, but, after all, I'm very glad I took it. I think this class has taught me a lot of valuable lessons, not just about digital archaeology, but as a university student.

The first thing I want to mention is certainly the concept of 'Failing Gloriously' that we were introduced to so early on. Thinking about the coursework, rather in terms of letter-grade pass / fail assignments, as real opportunities to learn was a refreshing and productive step. Productive failure as a process helped alleviate a lot of the anxieties I had about this course as someone with limited technical literacy.

Another significant ‘win’ from this class was practicing collaborative work way more than I would have thought. It’s certainly been one of the major themes throughout all three modules for me, and has helped me overcome many hurdles in this course. Working collaboratively with others presents new perspectives, and more importantly a broader skillset. The help I got from my sister in module 2 is definitely a prime example of this, but another less-mentioned example is the discord server. From its induction, you (Dr. Graham) have said it would be an asset if we weren’t active and just “lurked”. And, indeed, I found myself being a bit of a discord lurker, and found a lot of helpful information and conversations on the server. There were times when sure, I was making my way through the work by myself, but as soon as I got help or insight from a second or third person, the process became far more constructive.

One thing I found some appreciation for in this class was the debate around data sensitivity. From early on, with the Data Feminist reading “What Gets Counted, Counts”, I began to realize what we recorded as archaeologists was more than just some measurements and field notes. Data, the process of recording it, and the process of sharing it, has real dimensions and real consequences on the world around us. I like to consider the three modules of this course broken up along the lines of “Data collection / Data analysis / Data sharing”. Each of these stages included key issues about how to responsibly handle what I used to think of as a random collection of variables. I’ve learned that there's more to archaeology than just measuring gravestones and finding out what kind of rock they’re made of. I don’t want to dwell too much on my failure to keep a reliable research compendium of this class - I think I've said all I need to about it. But I do now realize the human importance of archaeology. There is an ongoing story connected to every fragment of history that connects us to the past, and to the future.

Another conception I came into class with, one that I didn’t really realize or have a name for until the end of the course, was the idea of archaeology as a non-renewable resource (Sara Perry, The Enchantment of the Archaeological Record). While I didn’ think about it in the same terms as Perry describes it, I definitely realized I held a similar understanding about archaeology as the ‘endangerment narrative’. Archaeology was the act of preserving, and that didn’t leave much space for ‘doing’ archaeology. This class has shown me ways in which archaeology becomes a living science, where it’s not just about recording found information but recreating a living past, and also, understanding the present world around us. In short, at the beginning of this course I thought archaeology was just about the dead; Now, I realize it is just as much about the living.
